Lower-level functions
=====================

Piculet also provides a lower-level API where you can run the stages
separately.
For example, if the same document will be scraped multiple times
with different rules, calling the ``scrape`` function repeatedly will cause
the document to be parsed into a DOM tree repeatedly.
Instead, you can create the DOM tree once,
and run extraction rules against this tree multiple times.

Also, this API uses code to express the specification (instead of strings)
and therefore development tools can help better in writing the rules
by showing error indicators and suggesting autocompletions.

Building the tree
-----------------

The DOM tree can be created from the document using
the :func:`build_tree <piculet.build_tree>` function:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from piculet import build_tree
   >>> root = build_tree(document)

If the document needs to be converted from HTML to XML, you can use
the :func:`html_to_xhtml <piculet.html_to_xhtml>` function:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from piculet import html_to_xhtml
   >>> converted = html_to_xhtml(document)
   >>> root = build_tree(converted)

If lxml is available, you can use the ``lxml_html`` parameter for building
the tree without converting an HTML document into XHTML:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> root = build_tree(document, lxml_html=True)

.. note::

   Note that if you use the lxml.html builder, there might be differences
   about how the tree is built compared to the piculet conversion method,
   and the path queries for preprocessing and extraction might need changes.

Preprocessing
-------------

Preprocessors are functions that take an element in the DOM tree as parameter
and modify the tree.
The :attr:`preprocessors <piculet.preprocessors>` registry contains
preprocessor generators which take the parameters other than the element
to apply the operation to, and return a function that expects the element:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from piculet import preprocessors
   >>> remove_ads = preprocessors.remove(path='//div[@class="ad"]')
   >>> remove_ads(root)

.. warning::

   The preprocessing functions assume that the root of the tree
   doesn't change.

Data extraction
---------------

The API for data extraction has a one-to-one correspondance
with the specification mapping.

Path extractors are functions that are applied to an element
to extract the value for a single data item.
They are generated by the :func:`make_path <piculet.make_path>` function:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from piculet import make_path
   >>> path = make_path(
   ...     path='//span[@class="year"]/text()',
   ...     transform=int
   ... )
   >>> path(root)
   1980

Every item in the result mapping is generated by a "rule" in the API.
Rules are functions that are applied to an element to extract
data items in the result mapping, so their basic function is to associate
the keys with the values.
Rules are generated by the :func:`make_rule <piculet.make_rule>` function:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from piculet import make_rule
   >>> rule = make_rule(
   ...     key="year",
   ...     value=make_path(
   ...         path='//span[@class="year"]/text()',
   ...         transform=int
   ...     )
   ... )
   >>> rule(root)
   {'year': 1980}

Items extractors are functions that are applied to an element
to extract subitems for a data item.
Basically, they are a collection of rules.
They are generated by the :func:`make_items <piculet.make_items>` function:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> from piculet import make_items
   >>> rules = [
   ...     make_rule(
   ...         key="title",
   ...         value=make_path(
   ...             path="//title/text()"
   ...         )
   ...     ),
   ...     make_rule(
   ...         key="year",
   ...         value=make_path(
   ...             path='//span[@class="year"]/text()',
   ...             transform=int
   ...         )
   ...     )
   ... ]
   >>> items = make_items(rules)
   >>> items(root)
   {'title': 'The Shining', 'year': 1980}


Items extractors act both as the top level extractor that gets applied
to the root of the tree, and also as an extractor for any rule with subitems.

.. note::

   If you like, you can use class-like syntax to be similar to Piculet v1.

    .. code-block:: python

       >>> from piculet import make_rule as Rule
       >>> from piculet import make_path as Path
       >>> from piculet import make_items as Items

An extractor can have a ``foreach`` parameter if it will be multi-valued:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> rules = [
   ...     make_rule(
   ...         key="genres",
   ...         value=make_path(
   ...             foreach='//ul[@class="genres"]/li',
   ...             path="./text()",
   ...             transform=str.lower,
   ...         )
   ...     )
   ... ]
   >>> items = make_items(rules)
   >>> items(root)
   {'genres': ['horror', 'drama']}

The ``key`` parameter of a rule can be an extractor in which case it can be
used to extract the key value from content.
A rule can also have a ``foreach`` parameter for generating multiple items
in one rule.
These features will work as they are described in the data extraction section.

A more complete example with transformations is given below.
Again note that the specification is exactly the same as given
in the corresponding mapping example in the data extraction chapter.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> rules = [
   ...     make_rule(
   ...         key="cast",
   ...         value=make_items(
   ...             foreach='//table[@class="cast"]/tr',
   ...             rules=[
   ...                 make_rule(
   ...                     key="name",
   ...                     value=make_path("./td[1]/a/text()")
   ...                 ),
   ...                 make_rule(
   ...                     key="character",
   ...                     value=make_path("./td[2]/text()")
   ...                 )
   ...              ],
   ...              transform=lambda x: "%(name)s as %(character)s" % x
   ...         )
   ...     )
   ... ]
   >>> make_items(rules)(root)
   {'cast': ['Jack Nicholson as Jack Torrance',
     'Shelley Duvall as Wendy Torrance']}

A rule can have a ``section`` parameter as described in the data extraction
chapter:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> rules = [
   ...     make_rule(
   ...         key="director",
   ...         value=make_items(
   ...             section='//div[@class="director"]//a',
   ...             rules=[
   ...                 make_rule(
   ...                     key="name",
   ...                     value=make_path("./text()")
   ...                 ),
   ...                 make_rule(
   ...                     key="link",
   ...                     value=make_path("./@href")
   ...                 )
   ...             ]
   ...         )
   ...     )
   ... ]
   >>> make_items(rules)(root)
   {'director': {'name': 'Stanley Kubrick', 'link': '/people/1'}}
